---
title: "Exposure to Diesel Particulate Matter and COVID-19 Mortality in the Continental United States"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2014-02-01-talk-2
venue: "NC GIS Virtual Conference"
date: 2021-02-18
location: "Virtual"
---

Presentation available [here](https://www.youtube.com/c/NCGISConference/videos)

Abstract: The Center for Disease Control and Prevention stated that people with certain underlying respiratory and cardiovascular conditions (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lung cancer, asthma) might be at an increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19. A number of epidemiological studies identified Diesel Particulate Matter (DPM) as a toxic air contaminant and concluded that DPM exposure may affect the pulmonary and cardiovascular systems. Objective of the study The objective of the project is to assess if increased county-level population exposure corresponds to increased DPM COVID-19 mortality rates. Method We performed a stepwise variable selection procedure to identify and adjust for six potential confounders of the relationship between county-level DPM concentration and COVID-19 mortality rate. Then, we used different models to assess spatial correlation between deaths related to COVID-19 and DPM. After running an ordinary least squares model and conducting the Moran’s I test for spatial clustering, two global models – a spatial lag model (SLM) and a spatial error model (SEM) - and a local geographically weighted regression (GWR) model were run. To account for potential correlation among counties within the same state, we fit a negative binomial generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) and analyzed the performance of the model using sensitivity analysis. Results DPM concentrations for all models were statistically significant predictors of COVID-19 mortality rate. The nationwide models produced coefficients of determination of 39%, 46% and 67% for SLM, GWR and GLMM, respectively. Although, there was no difference in coefficient of determination between the spatial lag and the spatial error, the deviation was slightly higher for spatial error or some variables. The global models suggest that there is an increase in COVID-19 death of 1-3 people out of one-hundred thousand for every unit increase in DPM concentration. However, at a local level, the distribution of the DPM coefficient showed no potential increase of COVID-19 deaths per unit increase in DPM in the South. Moreover, the distribution of the local coefficient of determination revealed that variability in DPM concentration explains about 70 to 80% of COVID-19 mortality in the West and the Northeast. The GLMM model suggested that an increase of 1 ug/m^3 in long-term averaged DPM concentration is associated with an 10% increase in county-level COVID-19 mortality. In conclusion, although we found a higher correlation between COVID-19 and the confounders, there is still a statistically significant relationship between DPM and COVID-19 after adjusting for the potential confounders.
