---
title: "Spatial Associations of Long-term Exposure to Diesel Particulate Matter and Black Race with Seasonal and Annual Mortality Due to COVID-19 in the Contiguous United States"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2014-03-01-talk-3
venue: "2022 Equity Research Symposium"
date: 2022-02-08
location: "Raleigh, NC"

---

More information [here](https://provost.ncsu.edu/strategic-initiatives/equity-research-symposium/)

Abstract: Studies have observed a disproportionate share of COVID-19 incidence and mortality among predominantly Black U.S. communities, which may be attributable in part to social and economic inequalities and underlying respiratory and cardiovascular conditions. Diesel Particulate Matter (DPM) exposure may affect the pulmonary and cardiovascular systems. A greater concentration of DPM is accumulated in socioeconomically disadvantaged communities.  The objective of the study is to assess if long-term DPM exposure, while accounting for potentially socio-economic confounding effects, was spatially associated with COVID-19 mortality across three consecutive waves (January-May, June-September, October-December) of the disease and throughout 2020. We tested a series of association models, starting with an ordinary least square model. After observing spatial dependence in the residuals, a spatial lag model and a spatial error model, and a geographically weighted regression (GWR) model were run to analyze spatial patterns and seasonal relationships between COVID-19 mortality and long-term exposure to DPM. Positive associations were observed for the January-May and June-September waves with all three global models. Among all confounding covariates incorporated in the models, fraction Black race and fraction American Indian ethnicity were statistically significant in all models. The local GWR model found that associations between COVID-19 deaths and fraction Black race may increase up to 540, 414, 1268, and 1378 deaths per 100,000 people in some US counties for every fraction unit increase in Black race  for the January-May, June-September, October-December, and yearlong models. 
